Have you ever noticed that you can hit
big numbers in training, but when it
comes to comp day, you fall short?
That's the result of poor peaking and
it's avoidable. Today, I want to teach
you how to peak for strength so that
doesn't happen again. This is one of the
most misunderstood parts of training.
Before I continue, I want to let you
know why you should listen to me. I'm
the coach of Thor Bjönson, one of the
strongest humans ever. And we're using
these peaking methods to train for his
upcoming competition where he will
deadlift 505 kg to break his own 501 kg
deadlift world record, which I also
coached him for. Not only am I going to
teach you everything that you need to
know about peing for strength, I'm also
going to give you a free 4-week peing
program so that you can use to peak in
your strength. Picking for strength is
about one thing, turning up on game day
and performing at your absolute best.
It's the final phase in a structured
training cycle designed not to build
strength, but to express it when it
matters most. Whether you compete in a
strength sport like powerlifting,
strongman, or Olympic weightlifting, or
in a non-strength sport such as martial
arts, rugby, or track and field, the
principle remains the same. Peaking
allows you to reduce fatigue, sharpen
your specificity, and deliver your top
performance at exactly the right time.
The reason we can't peak for strength
all year round is because the way that
we train to build strength conflicts
with the way that we train to peak in
strength. The most effective way to
build strength is to train with loads at
or above 80% of your one rep max. When
combined with the right rep ranges, this
typically falls between 1 to six reps.
Although the 1 to six rep range can all
be used to build strength, my preferred
range for strength development is three
to six reps, the one and two rep ranges
are more fatiguing and don't allow for
sufficient training volume, which limits
their usefulness for strength
development. I reserve those lower rep
ranges for skill acquisition and peing.
Research and my own personal experience
suggests that 6 to 12 sets per movement
pattern per week is ideal for building
strength. This is slightly lower than
the recommended sets for building muscle
because the weights being used are a lot
heavier. Combining heavy weights with
high volume is too fatiguing and makes
it hard to progress. But even though the
volume is reduced during the strength
phase, it's still too high for a peaking
phase and will interfere with your
ability to express your true strength
potential.
One of the most important
characteristics of a peaking phase is
the reduction of fatigue. This is mainly
achieved by reducing training volume.
That fatigue can mask performance and
make it harder to lift at your absolute
best. This is why peaking should be
separated into its own phase. By
reducing volume, fatigue is lowered and
you're able to express a higher amount
of strength that has already been built
in the previous phases. However, this
lower volume comes at a cost. You can't
stay in a peaking phase for too long
without starting to lose the very
qualities that made you strong in the
first place. It's well known amongst
researchers, coaches, and highle
athletes that you can't hold a peak all
year round. Most athletes can only
maintain a true peak for about 2 weeks
before performance starts to decline.
This is because the low volume used
during peaking results in the d-training
of other physical qualities like
hypertrophy and work capacity, both of
which are important for sustaining
strength. And because the peak phase is
not designed to create new adaptations,
progress will stall. Some of the best
periodization researchers suggest
peaking phases of up to 6 weeks. In my
experience, even that's too long. While
you don't lose strength immediately, it
only takes around 2 to 3 weeks of low
volume training before you begin to
drain those physical qualities. I found
a 2 to four week peaking phase to be far
more effective. This time frame allows
for sufficient recovery, increased
specificity and intensity without
sacrificing the size and strength that
you've worked so hard to build in the
earlier training cycles. The stronger
and more advanced the athlete, the more
recovery that they need, but even then
more than 4 weeks is rarely necessary.
My preferred strategy for peaking
involves a structured and gradual
reduction in training volume combined
with a progressive increase in
intensity. This means over a four-week
peak block, I don't drastically decrease
the volume immediately. It's gradual in
an attempt to avoid d-training the
muscle mass and work capacity that we
work so hard to build. Here is a great
way to set up a four-week peaking plan
to factor all of this in. Week one is
four sets of four, week two, three sets
of three. Week three is two sets of two.
And week four, the final week, is one
set of one. Each week, volume is
reduced, intensity is increased, and
lift becomes more specific to the
competition. This method provides a
smooth and effective transition from
training to peak performance.
As the peak progresses, accessory works
should also be reduced and even removed
entirely, especially in the final one to
two weeks. If included, accessories
should be low fatigue isolation style
movements that don't interfere with
recovery. I include low fatigue joint
health movements that support injury
prevention such as face pulls, external
rotations, or loaded mobility exercises.
I could also factor in lowcost isolation
hypertrophy exercises like tricep push
downs after bench pressing, leg
extensions after squats, and hamstring
curls after deadlifts. These movements
help maintain some muscle mass without
adding unnecessary fatigue. So remember,
maxing out or lifting heavy all year
round is fun, but typically not
sustainable. Everyone wants to feel
strong all year round, but staying at
your peak comes at a cost, and that cost
is often your long-term progress. This
is exactly why periodization was created
to separate training blocks into
different phases. Develop different
qualities at the right time and bring it
together on competition day when it
counts. So now you know my take on
peaking. And if you haven't already,
click the link in the description to get
your free four-week peing program.